>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING, I'M
JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT,
HOMICIDES SPIKE, AFTER DECLINING
FOR DECADES.
WHAT'S BEHIND THE RISE OF
VIOLENT CRIME IN AMERICAN
CITIES.
>> Woodruff: THEN, OUR RUNNING
SERIES CONTINUES: AN INTERVIEW
WITH REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE DR. BEN CARSON.
>> Ifill: PLUS, THE NEW IRON
CURTAIN IN EASTERN EUROPE.
HUNGARY SEALS ITS BORDER TO STOP
THE FLOW OF MIGRANTS.
>> THE HUNGARIAN BOARDER IS THE
EUROPEAN BORDER.
WHEN WE ARE PROTECTING THE
BORDERS OF HUNGARY, WE'RE AT THE
SAME TIME PROTECTING EUROPE.
>> YOU ARE STOPPING REFUGEES
FROM FLEEING WAR ZONES.
>> Woodruff: ALL THAT AND MORE
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE LARGEST OF 27
WILDFIRES IN CALIFORNIA KEPT
EXPANDING TODAY.
THE ROCKY FIRE HAS NOW SPREAD
ACROSS MORE THAN 100 SQUARE
MILES.
IT'S BURNING SOME 100 MILES
NORTH OF SAN FRANCISCO, AND SO
FAR, IT'S ONLY 12% CONTAINED.
OVERNIGHT, THE BLAZE JUMPED A
HIGHWAY THAT SERVED AS A
BARRIER.
IT'S ENDANGERING SEVERAL
THOUSAND HOMES, AND OFFICIALS
HAVE URGED ABOUT 13,000 PEOPLE
TO LEAVE THE AREA.
>> Woodruff: THE FAMILY OF A
BLACK WOMAN WHO DIED IN A TEXAS
JAIL HAS NOW FILED A WRONGFUL
DEATH SUIT IN FEDERAL COURT.
SANDRA BLAND WAS PULLED OVER BY
A WHITE TROOPER FOR A TRAFFIC
VIOLATION.
THREE DAYS LATER SHE WAS FOUND
HANGING IN HER JAIL CELL.
OFFICIALS SAY SHE COMMITTED
SUICIDE.
TODAY, IN AUSTIN, HER MOTHER
SAID WHATEVER THE CIRCUMSTANCES
OF BLAND'S DEATH, HER
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS WERE
VIOLATED.
>> I AM STILL CONFIDENT IN THE
FACT THAT SHE KNEW ENOUGH ABOUT
JESUS SHE WOULD NOT TAKE HERSELF
OUT.
NOW I'M THE FIRST ONE TO TELL
YOU IF THE FACTS, THE FACTS, I'M
NOT TALKING ABOUT THE FICTION,
IF THE FACTS SHOW WITHOUT A
DOUBT THAT THAT WAS THE CASE
I'LL HAVE TO BE PREPARED TO DEAL
WITH THAT.
BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS SHE NEVER
SHOULD HAVE BEEN INSIDE THAT
JAIL.
>> Woodruff: BLAND'S FAMILY
WANTS A FEDERAL INVESTIGATION OF
HER DEATH, PLUS FULL TOXICOLOGY
RESULTS FROM THE TIME OF HER
DEATH.
IN YEMEN, PRO-GOVERNMENT FORCES,
BACKED BY SAUDI AIR STRIKES,
HAVE GAINED MORE GROUND FROM
SHIITE REBELS ALLIED WITH IRAN.
NEW CLASHES ERUPTED TODAY
OUTSIDE THE SOUTHERN CITY OF
ADEN.
A DAY EARLIER, LOYALIST TROOPS
RECAPTURED A STRATEGIC MILITARY
BASE THAT THE REBELS HAD HELD
SINCE SPRING.
>> Ifill: FORMAL EFFORTS BEGAN
TODAY IN THE U.S. CONGRESS TO
KILL THE NUCLEAR DEAL WITH IRAN.
REPUBLICAN ED ROYCE, CHAIRING
THE HOUSE FOREIGN AFFAIRS
COMMITTEE, INTRODUCED A BILL TO
DISAPPROVE THE AGREEMENT.
SENATE REPUBLICANS, INCLUDING
SOUTH DAKOTA'S JOHN THUNE,
PROMISED A SIMILAR EFFORT.
>> THE PRESIDENT, WHO HAS UP
UNTIL RECENTLY SAID THAT NO DEAL
IS BETTER THAN A BAD DEAL, HAS
NOW ALL OF A SUDDEN CHANGED HIS
LANGUAGE.
IT'S EVOLVED NOW TO WHERE IT'S
THIS DEAL OR WAR.
AND I THINK THAT THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE SEE THROUGH THAT.
AND IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT THAT
WE HAVE THIS DISCUSSION, WE HAVE
THIS DEBATE.
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS PROMISED
TO VETO ANY RESOLUTION THAT
REJECTS THE IRAN DEAL.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
PROMISED TO VETO ANY RESOLUTION
THAT REJECTS THE IRAN DEAL.
HE WON THE SUPPORT TODAY OF
THREE KEY DEMOCRATS: SENATORS
TIM KAINE OF VIRGINIA, BARBARA
BOXER OF CALIFORNIA AND BILL
NELSON OF FLORIDA.
>> I BELIEVE IT'S IN THE U.S.
INTERESTS THAT IRAN IS NOT A
NUCLEAR POWER SPONSORING
TERRORISTS.
AS DANGEROUS A THREAT THAT IRAN
IS TO ISRAEL AND OUR ALLIES, IT
WOULD PALE IN COMPARISON TO THE
THREAT POSED TO THEM AND TO US
BY A NUCLEAR ARMED IRAN.
>> Ifill: MEANWHILE, ISRAELI
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU AGAIN CONDEMNED THE
IRAN DEAL, IN A WEBCAST TO
MEMBERS OF AMERICAN JEWISH
GROUPS.
>> Woodruff: AUTHORITIES IN
ISRAEL HAVE ARRESTED THE ALLEGED
HEAD OF A JEWISH EXTREMIST GROUP
AFTER A FATAL ARSON ATTACK.
A PALESTINIAN CHILD DIED LAST
WEEK WHEN HIS FAMILY'S HOME WAS
SET ON FIRE.
ISRAELI LEADERS HAVE BLAMED
JEWISH EXTREMISTS AND VOWED TO
CRACK DOWN ON THEIR ACTIVITIES.
>> Ifill: AMERICAN AIRLINES
TODAY JOINED UNITED AND DELTA IN
BANNING THE TRANSPORT OF BIG
GAME TROPHIES.
THAT FOLLOWS AN INTERNATIONAL
UPROAR OVER THE KILLING OF
CECIL THE LION IN ZIMBABWE BY AN
AMERICAN DENTIST.
THE AIRLINES SAY THEY WILL NO
LONGER ACCEPT LION, LEOPARD,
ELEPHANT, RHINO AND BUFFALO
TROPHIES.
>> Woodruff: AND ON WALL STREET,
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 47 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,550.
THE NASDAQ FELL ABOUT 10 POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED NEARLY
FIVE.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
POLICE GRAPPLE WITH A RISE IN
MURDERS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
WHAT YOU CAN DO TO PROTECT
YOURSELF AGAINST DRUG RESISTANT
INFECTIONS.
AND MUCH MORE.
>> Woodruff: THE FIRST HALF OFRE
VIOLENT AND TRAGIC ONE IN MANY
CITIES, LEADING POLICE,
COMMUNITY LEADERS, FAMILIES AND
FRIENDS OF VICTIMS TO ASK,
WHAT'S HAPPENING?
>> Woodruff: ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
SCENES LIKE THESE ARE PLAYINGSC.
THE MAJOR CITIES POLICE CHIEFS
ASSOCIATION REPORTS HOMICIDES
HAVE SPED TIKHIS YEAR AFTER
HITTING 50-YEAR LOWS IN 2013.
MEMBERS OF THE GROUP VOICED
ALARM AT A WASHINGTON MEETING ON
MONDAY.
>> WHAT WE FOCUSEDN WA OS THE
FACT THAT WE'RE GOING TO
SHOOTING SCENES NOW WHERE YOU'VE
GOT MORE AND MORE VICTIMS BEING
SHOT, YOU'VE GOT MORE SPENT
ROUNDS BEING COLLECTED AS
EVIDENCE; WE'RE FINDING MORE AND
MORE HIGH CAPACITY MAGAZINES
INVOLVED IN THESE SHOOTINGS.
>> Woodruff: THE ASSOCIATION
REPORTS HOMICIDES ARE UP AN
AVERAGE OF 19% IN 35 BIG CITIES.
CHICAGO HAS THE DUBIOUS
DISTINCTION OF LEADING THE LIST,
WITH 252 KILLINGS, UP 20%.
BUT ST. LOUIS AND MILWAUKEEAVE H
SEEN INCREASES OF ROUGHLY 60 TO
88%.
THE CITY OF BALTIMORE HAD 45
HOMICIDES IN JULY ALONE, THE
MOST SINCE 1972.
THAT FOLLOWED THE DEATH OF
FREDDIE GRAY IN POLICE CUSTODY
LAST APRIL, AND THE RESULTING
RIOTS.
YESTERDAY, BALTIMORE LEADERS
ANNOUNCED FEDERAL AGENCIES WILL
EMBED SPECIAL AGENTS WITH CITY
TECDETIVES.
DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSMAN ELIJAH
CUMMINGS.
>> THE ONLY PEOPLE WHORE A
GETTING, MAKING, DOING PRETTY
GOOD NOW ARE THE MORTICIANS.
THEY'RE THE ONLY ONES.
AND I SAY THAT WE ARE A CITY
THAT IS BETTER THAN THAT.
AND SO TO ALL OF OUR, ALL THOSE
FOLKS WHO THINK THAT YOU'VE GOT
TO-- YOU GET YOUR POWER FROM
CARRYING A GUN AND SHOOTING
SOMEBODY AND HURTING SOMEBODY
I'M BEGGING YOU, PUT YOUR GUNS
DOWN.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, POLICE
CHIEFS SAY THEY ARE STILL TRYING
TO FULLY UNDERSTAND WHAT'S
BEHIND THE SURGE IN KILLINGS.
WE TURN NOW TO TWO POLICE CHIEFS
DEALING WITH THIS EVERY DAY:
CHIEF EDWARD FLYNN FROM
MILWAUKEE AND COLONEL SAMUEL
DOTSON THE POLICE CHIEF OF ST.
LOUIS.
CHIEF FLYNN, TO YOU FIRST.
MILWAUKEE AN 88% IN HOMICIDES
JUST SINCE LAST YEAR.
WHAT IS GOING ON?
>> WELL, WE'RE SEEING A NUMBER
OF DIFFERENT DYNAMICS PLAYING
OUT.
CERTAINLY ONE OF THE THINGS
WE'VE SEEN IS A DRAMATIC
INCREASE IN THE USE OF FIREARMS,
PARTICULARLY SEMI-AUTOMATIC
PISTOLS IN OUR VIOLENT DEATHS.
WE'VE SEEN THAT OUR SHOOTINGS
ARE UP SIGNIFICANTLY, OUR
HOMICIDES ARE UP DRAMATICALLY.
OVER 85% OF OUR HOMICIDES ARE
COMMITTED WITH FIREARMS, AND OF
THOSE, OVER 85% ARE COMMITTED
WITH SEMI-AUTOMATIC PISTOLS.
WE RECENTLY PASSED A VERY WEAK
AND LUDICROUSLY WEAK GUN LAW
THAT ALLOWS BASICALLY CONCEALED
CARRY PERMITS TO BE GRANTED TO
PEOPLE WHO MEET THE STATUTORY
DEFINITION OF CAREER CRIMINALS.
WE'VE ALSO GOT A SITUATION WHERE
NO MATTER HOW MANY TIMES YOU ARE
ARRESTED FOR CARRYING OUR GUN
ILLEGALLY, IT REMAINS A
MISDEMEANOR, EVEN THOUGH A
SECOND OFFENSE FOR CARRYING
MARIJUANA CAN BE PROSECUTED AS A
FELONY.
SO VERY WEAK AND RELATIVELY
RECENT GUN LAWS ARE CERTAINLY A
MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR TO OUR
DRAMATIC SPIKE IN
FIREARMS-RELATED VIOLENCE.
>> CHIEF, WHAT ABOUT IN ST.
LOUIS?
A 64% INCREASE OVER LAST YEAR.
IS IT ALL ABOUT GUNS?
>> I'M SEEING EXACTLY THE SAME
THING THEY'RE SEEING IN
MILWAUKEE.
THE AVAILABILITY OF GUNS.
WE HAVE A CONSTITUTIONAL
AMENDMENT IN OUR STATETHAT WAS
PASSED WITHIN THE LAST YEAR THAT
MAKES IT AN INAILENNABLE RIGHT
TO HAVE A GUN.
COURTS HAVE DECLINED TO
PROSECUTE CONVICTED FELONS WE
ARREST WITH GUNS.
I'M SEEING EXACTLY THE SAME
THING, HIGH-CAPACITY MAGAZINE, A
WILLINGNESS TO USE THE GUNS, AND
A JUDICIARY THAT SOMETIMES
DOESN'T FOLLOW THROUGH ON THE
PROSECUTION.
WE HAD RESEARCH DONE FROM A
UNIVERSITY HERE OF ABOUT 250
CASES OF UNLAWFUL USE OF A
WEAPON.
OVER 61% OF THOSE CASES GOT
PROBATION.
THAT MEANS THOSE PEOPLE ARE
RIGHT BACK OUT ON THE STREET
COMMITTING CRIMES.
>>
>> Woodruff:, SO CHIEF FLYNN,
IS THIS DIFFERENT IN MILWAUKEE
FROM THE SITUATION LAST YEAR AND
THE YEAR BEFORE?
THERE WAS A DROP IN THE HOMICIDE
RATE UP UNTIL A YEAR OR TWO AGO.
NOW IT SHOT BACK UP.
IS THERE SUCH A DIFFERENCE IN
PEOPLE'S ACCESSIBILITY PEOPLE
HAVE WITH GUNS?
>> I THINK THE CONSENSUS AMONG
THE CHIEFS IS A DESIRE TO LEARN
WHAT ARE THE COMPONENTS OF WHAT
APPEARS TOE A B TIPPING POINT.
WHAT ARE THE SERIES OF SMALL
CHANGES THAT TAKEN TOGETHER HAVE
CREATED A DRAMATIC SPIKE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY IN OUR CENTRAL
CITIES.
CERTAINLY OUR FIREARMS LAW WENT
INTO EFFECT IN NOVEMBER OF 2011.
AND ALMOST IMMEDIATELY WE
STARTED TO SEE AN INCREASE IN
THE USE OF PISTOLS.
THE USE OF A PISTOL IN A CRIME
IN MILWAUKEE, THE BIGGEST SINGLE
NUMBER IS UNDER THREE MONTHS.
OUR FIREARMS ARE EASILY BOUGHT
LEGALLY.
90% OF THE CRIME GUNS WE SEIZE
AT THE SCENE OF A CRIME WERE
BOUGHT LEGALLY.
AND THEY WERE SOLD LEGALLY TOO
BECAUSE SECONDARY SALES DON'T
REQUIRE BACKGROUND CHECKS.
WE HAVE A SIGNIFICANT COMPONENT
TO OUR VIOLENCE PROBLEM AND IN
OTHER SIMILARLY SITUATED CITIES.
THE EASY AVAILABILITY OF
FIREARMS, LARGE-CAPACITY
MAGAZINES IS RESULTING IN MANY
MORE BULLETS BEING USED IN OUR
CRIME SCENES AND MANY MORE GUNS
BEING USED AT OUR CRIME SCENES.
>> WELL, BOTH OF YOU HAVE TALKED
TO THE NEWS MEDIA ABOUT THIS,
AND YOU'VE ALSO ATTRIBUTED OTHER
FACTORS.
CHIEF DOTSON, LAST NOVEMBER THIS
WAS A FEW MONTHS AFTER THE
MICHAEL BROWN INCIDENT IN
FERGUSON, YOU TOLD... YOU SAID,
QUOTING, YOU SAID POLICE
OFFICERS HAD BEEN DRAWING BACK
FROM EVERYDAY ENFORCEMENT DUE
THE FEARS THEY COULD BE CHARGED.
AS A RESULT, THE CRIMINAL
ELEMENT IS FEELING EMPOWERED.
IS THAT STILL THE CASE THERE IN
ST. LUCIE -- ST. LOUIS?
>> I THINK IT'S PART OF
CONVERSATION THAT HAS TO HAPPEN
NATIONALLY.
WE TALKED ABOUT IT YESTERDAY IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.,, THE FERGUSON
EFFECT, AND HOW SOME DEPARTMENTS
MAY SEE OFFICERS THAT HAVE A
LITTLE TREPIDATION WHEN THEY GO
INTO AN ENFORCEMENT SITUATION.
WE SEE CRIMINALS WILL HAVE A
LITTLE FEELING OF EMPOWERMENT
AROUND THE MOVEMENT THAT'S GOING
ON.
SO I THINK WHEN YOU LAYER THAT
IN WITH THE AVAILABILITY OF
GUNS, THE TREPIDATION OF POLICE
OFFICERS AND IN ST. LOUIS A
LITTLE BIT NOW AN UPTICK IN THE
USE OF HEROIN, CRACK COCAINE
DIFFICULT TO FIND, HEROIN IS THE
DRUG OF CHOICE.
I THINK WE'RE SEEING A LOT OF
STREET-LEVEL DISPUTES THAT ARE
SOLVED WITH FIREARMS BECAUSE OF
THAT.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF FLYNN, YOU
SAID IN AN INTERVIEW WITH A
REPORTER NOT LONG AGO, YOU SAID
SOCIETY OVER THE LAST 25 YEARS
HAS DELEGATED ITS SOCIAL
PROBLEMS TO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM, AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM, YOU SAID, IS
INSUFFICIENT TO THE TASK.
WHAT DID YOU MEAN BY THAT?
>> WELL, OUR MOST CHALLENGED
NEIGHBORHOODS ARE POPULATED BY
FOLKS WHO ARE SUFFERING FROM
GENERATIONS OF POVERTY AND
UNEMPLOYMENT.
IF YOU DRAW AN ELLIPSE OVER OUR
HIGHEST CRIME NEIGHBORHOODS,
YOU'RE GOING TO FIND THAT THOSE
CAPTURE THE HIGHEST PERCENTAGE
OF ABANDONED AND FORECLOSED
HOUSE, THE HIGHEST POVERTY
RATES, THE HIGHEST UNEMPLOYMENT
RATES AND SO ON.
PUBLIC SPACE, VIOLENT CRIME IS
ONE OF THE MANY SYMPTOMS OF
ENDEPPIC INTERGENERATIONAL
POVERTY.
THE PROBLEM IS IT IF LASTS 30 TO
40 YEARS, WE HAVE DISINVESTED IN
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES,
DISINVESTED IN SOCIAL SERVICE,
DISINVESTED IN VIRTUAL HE
EVERYTHING IN FOLKS IN THESE
CONDITIONS NEED EXCEPT THE
POLICE.
80% OF OUR WORK, EVEN IN OUR
HIGHEST-CRIME NEIGHBORHOODS IS
FUNDAMENTALLY SOCIAL WORK.
I NEED TO ADD SOMETHING ELSE, AS
OBVIOUSLY THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM IS COMING UNDER A LOT OF
SCRUTINY RIGHT NOW, AS WELL AS
IT SHOULD IN A FREE SOCIETY.
BUT I WOULD SIMPLY ASK THAT AS
WE COVER THE NEEDS FOR POSSIBLE
CHANGES IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM, WE STOP IGNORING THE
FACT THAT THE BIGGEST DISPARITY
IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
IS CRIMINAL VICTIMIZATION INCH
MY CITY, IF YOU'RE AN AFTER CAB
AMERICAN, YOU ARE 18 TIMES MORE
LIKELY TO GET SHOT THAN IF YOU
ARE IF YOU ARE WHITE.
YOU'RE NINE TIMES MORE LIKELY TO
GET MURDERED.
THE LEVELS OF CRIME WITHIN THESE
CHALLENGED NEIGHBORHOODS ARE
EXTRAORDINARY, AND IT'S THAT
DISPARAGED VICTIMIZATION TO
WHICH THE POLICE RESPOND, AND
SADLY TOO OFTEN ARE CRITICIZED
BECAUSE THEY'RE THERE IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
>> WOODRUFF: CHIEF DOTSON, I
DON'T WANT TO ASK YOU FLAT OUT
IF YOU AGREE WITH WHAT HE SAID,
BUT WHAT IS YOUR PERSPECTIVE ON
THAT, ON THE ROLE THAT THESE
SOCIAL PROBLEMS, THAT THE FACT
THAT THE POLICE HAVE BEEN ASKED
TO SOLVE SOCIAL CHALLENGES IN
OUR COUNTRY.
>> I THINK HE'S ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT.
POLICE OFFICERS HAVE BECOME THE
FACE OF GOVERNMENT IN A LOT OF
COMMUNITIES.
AND AS WE'VE EN,SE SCHOOL
SYSTEMS FAIL, AS WE'VE SEEN
CUTBACKS IN MENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES, IN HEALTH SERVICES
OVERALL, WHEN YOU DIAL 911,
POLICE OFFICERS ARE THE ONES
THAT RESPOND FIRST AND MOST
QUICKLY.
AND WE'RE ASKED TO SOLVE A LOT
OF THOSE SYSTEMATIC SOCIAL
PROBLEMS THAT HAVE HAPPENED OVER
GENERATIONS.
CRIME HAS BEEN TRENDING DOWN AS
A COUNTRY FOR THE LAST 20 YEARS.
BUT NOW WE'RE AT A POINT WHERE
THE DISINVESTMENT INTO THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS, WE'RE STARTING TO
SEE THE OUTCOME OR THE RESULTS
OF THAT.
WE HAVE TO GET BACK TO FOCUSING
RESOURCES INTO THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
BY RESOURCES I DON'T MEAN POLICE
OFFICERS.
WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT THERE
ARE QUALITY EDUCATION
OPPORTUNITIES, ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITIES, JOBS, SUBSTANCE
ABUSE PROGRAMS.
ALL OF THOSE ARE OUTSIDE OF LAW
ENFORCEMENT, BUT THOSE ARE
EXACTLY THE ISSUES THAT LAW
ENFORCEMENT DEALS WITH IN THE
COMMUNITY EVERY DAY BECAUSE
WE'RE THE ONLY FACE OF
GOVERNMENT IN SOME
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> Woodruff: VERY QUICK FINAL
QUESTION TO BOTH OF YOU INCH
BALTIMORE THEY ARE EMBEDDING TEN
FEDERAL AGENTS TO WORK WITH THE
CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT, TO HELP
THEM SOLVE, ADDRESS SOME OF
THEIR VIOLENCE ISSUES IS.
THAT THE KIND OF THING THAT
WOULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE TO BETH
OF YOU QUICKLY, CHIEF FLYNN?
>> WELL, WE USE F.B.I. AGENTS
AND A COUPLE OF OUR ANTI-GANG
TASK FORCES.
WE ALSO HAVE A PARTNERSHIP TO
THE ALCOHOL, TOBACCO AND FIREARM
S TASK FORCE.
SO FORMING PARTNERSHIPS IS
USEFUL, AND WORKING WITH THE
FEDS GETS YOU INTO FEDERAL COURT
WHERE THE SANCTIONS COULD BE
SIGNIFICANT.
>> AND CHIEF DOTSON?
>> WE'RE TAKING MANY CASES TO
THE FEDERAL AUTHORITIES, U.S.
ATTORNEY HERE.
WE HAVE DONE IT JUST THE
OPPOSITE.
WE'VE TAKEN POLICE OFFICERS FROM
THE CITY AND THE COUNTY AND
EMBEDDED THEM WITH FEDERAL
AGENTS ON A TASK FORCE TO FOCUS
ON THE VIOLENCE AND THE RAPID
RESPONSE FORCE.
SO NOT JUST THE HOMICIDES, BUT
THE VIOLENCE, BECAUSE A
PRECURSOR TO THE HOMICIDES ARE
THE SHOOTINGS THAT ED TALKED
ABOUT THAT ARE HAPPENING FAR TOO
FREQUENTLY, HIGH CAPACITY
MAGAZINE, LOTS OF VICTIMS.
>> CHIEF DOTSON OF ST.
LUCIE, CHIEF EDWARD FLYNN OF
MILWAUKEE, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: DOCTORS AND HEALTH
AUTHORITIES ARE INCREASINGLY
SOUNDING THE ALARM ABOUT THE
GROWTH OF DRUG-RESISTANT
BACTERIA.
IN THE U.S., THEY INFECT AT
LEAST TWO MILLION PEOPLE AND
TODAY, THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION ISSUED A
CALL TO SLOW THE RATE OF
HOSPITAL-ACQUIRED INFECTIONS
WHICH ALONE ACCOUNT FOR MORE
THAN 600,000 CASES.
ONE PARTICULAR BACTERIA IS
ACCOUNTABLE FOR 15,000 OF THOSE
DEATHS.
THE C.D.C. IS URGING HOSPITALS,
HEALTH DEPARTMENTS AND OTHERS TO
CHANGE THEIR APPROACH THE GERMS'
SPREAD-- ACTION THAT IT SAYS
COULD SAVE 37,000 LIVES.
DOCTOR MICHAEL BELL IS A DEPUTY
DIRECTOR THERE WHO SPECIALIZES
IN INFECTIOUS DISEASES. HE JOINS
ME NOW.
DR. BELL, EXPLAIN TO US IN
LAYMAN'S TERMS, FIRST OF ALL,
WHAT ARE DRUG-RESISTANT
INFECTIONS?
>> SO WHEN WE TALK ABOUT DRUG
RESISTANCE, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT GERMS THAT
CAN CAUSE INFECTIONS THAT
NORMALLY WE COULD HAVE TREATED
WITH ANTIBIOTICS BUT NOW WE
CAN'T.
THE GERMS CONTINUE TO DEVELOP
NEW WAYS OF GETTING AROUND THE
ANTIBIOTIC.
>> WHAT IS THE SOURCE OF THESE
GERMS?
>> WELL, THE GERMS COME FROM ALL
OVER THE PLACE.
YOU'RE SURROUNDED BY THEM.
WE'RE COVERED IN THEM.
WE'RE FULL OF THEM.
THE ENVIRONMENT THAT THEY LIVE
IN IS THE SAME ONE THAT WE
INHABIT.
THE KEY IS TO KEEP THEM FROM
GOING PLACES WHERE THEY DON'T
BELONG, AND IF THEY DO GET
THERE, TO BE ABLE TO TREAT THEM.
AND THAT'S THE CHALLENGE WITH
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE.
>> Ifill: SO WE FOCUS ON THE
KIND OF SUPERBUGS WE HEAR ABOUT
IN HOSPITALS, BUT YOU'RE SAYING
THAT THESE BUGS, THESE GERMS ARE
EVERYWHERE?
>> GERMANYS IN GENERAL ARE, IN
FACT, EVERYWHERE.
SUPERBUGS ARE OFTEN FOUND IN
HOSPITALS BECAUSE THAT'S WHERE
PEOPLE WITH EITHER DEVICES LIKE
CATHETERS OR SURGICAL WOUNDS
TEND TO BE, AND THOSE ARE ALSO
PEOPLE WHO TEND TO BE-TO-GET
ANTIBIOTICS.
WHEN YOU PUT THOSE TOGETHER,
IT'S A GREAT WAY TO GENERATE
MORE OF THESE VERY RESISTANT
BACTERIA.
>> Ifill: WHAT IS IT ABOUT
ANTIBIOTICS THAT MAKES THESE
GERMS TAKE HOLD OR MAKES IT
DIFFICULT FOR THEM TO STOP
SPREADING I GUESS?
>> WELL, SO THE ISSUE THAT WE'RE
FACING IS THAT IN THE PAST WE
WOULD HAVE ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
TO ONE OR TWO DRUGS, BUT WE HAD
MORE DRUGS IN THE PIPELINE.
RIGHT NOW WE'RE COMING AWFULLY
CLOSE TO THE CLIFF WHERE WE
DON'T HAVE NEW DRUGS COMING ON
THE MARKET VERY SOON, AND AT THE
SAME TIME, THESE BACTERIA, THE
NIGHTMARE BACTERIA, ARE
DEVELOPING MORE AND MORE
RESISTANCE TO A WIDER RANGE OF
DRUGS.
THAT MEANS NOT ONLY THAT WE
WON'T BE ABLE TO TREAT AN
INFECTION, BUT WHAT WORRIES US A
GREAT DEAL IS THAT WE'RE GOING
THE LOSE THE ABILITY TO DELIVER
TYPES OF CARE THAT WE TAKE FOR
GRANTED, SO, FOR EXAMPLE,
SURGERY, IF I'M IN A TRAFFIC
ACCIDENT, I CAN BE REPAIRED BY A
TALENTED SURGEON, BUT WITHOUT
ANTIBIOTICS, I MIGHT VERY WELL
DIE FROM AN INFECTION OF THE
WOUND.
SIMILARLY WITH CANCER TREATMENT,
IF MY IMMUNE SYSTEM HAS TO BE
TURNED DOWN TEMPORARILY, THAT'S
FINE FOR THE CANCER TREATMENT,
BUT WITHOUT ANTIBIOTICS, I MIGHT
DIE FROM AN INFECTION SOME
THERE'S A LOT ABOUT MODERN
HEALTH CARE THAT HINGES ON THE
AVAILABILITY OF GOOD
ANTIBIOTICS.
>> Ifill: WHAT WOULD IT COST
FOR US TO START TO IMPLEMENT
SOME OF THE IDEAS, SOME OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT THE C.D.C.
IS MAKING TO HEAD THIS OFF?
>> IT'S ALL ABOUT SCALE.
WE KNOW THAT THE TECHNIQUES AND
APPROACHES THAT WE DISCUSSED IN
THE PRESS CONFERENCE TODAY,
WHERE MULTIPLE HOSPITALS
COLLABORATE, INFORM EACH OTHER
AND WORK WITH THE HEALTH
DEPARTMENT TO GIVE EACH OTHER
HEADS UP FOR HOT SPOTS OF
INFECTION, OF PATIENTS WHO MIGHT
BE CARRYING SOMETHING.
THIS IS A VERY GOOD THING INCH
SOME THE HEALTH DEPARTMENTS,
SOME HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS ARE
ALREADY DOING IT.
BUT THEY'RE IN THE VERY SMALL
MINORITY.
AND SO WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT IT
IS MAKING IT POSSIBLE FOR ALL
PATIENTS IN THIS COUNTRY TO
BENEFIT FROM THAT KIND OF
COORDINATED CARE.
>> Ifill: WHO IS MOST AT RISK
AND WHAT DO WE SIMPLY, DO JUST
SIMPLY WASH OUR HANDS?
>> IN TERMS OF WHAT WE CAN DO AS
INDIVIDUAL, YES, HAND WASHING IS
GREAT.
INSISTING THAT PEOPLE WASH THEIR
HANDS BEFORE THEY TOUCH YOU IF
YOU'RE IN A HEALTH CARE SETTING
IS ALSO VERY IMPORTANT.
NOT BEING AFRAID TO SPEAK UP.
SIMILARLY, HAND WASHING IS GOOD
FOR CLINICIANS, BUT THERE ARE
MORE THINGS TO BE DONE.
ONE IS USING ANTIBIOTICS
CORRECTLY.
AND WISELY.
THERE'S A CONCEPT OF ANTIBIOTIC
STEWARDSHIP THAT FOCUSES ON
MAKING SURE THAT WE USE THE
RIGHT ANTIBIOTIC FOR THE RIGHT
AMOUNT OF TIME AND THEN WE STOP
AS SOON AS IT'S NOT NECESSARY
ANYMORE, SO WE DON'T GIVE
BACTERIA THE OPPORTUNITY TO
BECOME RESISTANT.
THAT STEWARDSHIP APPROACH IS
SOMETHING THAT IS RAPIDLY
BECOMING STANDARD OF CARE IN
MOST OF OUR HEALTH CARE
FACILITIES, AND IT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE'RE VERY ACTIVELY
PROMOTING.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT EVEN
IF WE'RE FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO
DEVELOP NEW DRUGS IN THE COMING
SEVERAL YEARS, WE WON'T SEE
THOSE USED UP AS QUICKLY AS
WE'VE SEEN EVERY OTHER
ANTIBIOTIC IN THE PAST.
>> Ifill: AND ELDERLY AND
INFANTS AND PEOPLE WITH
COMPROMISED IMMUNE SYSTEMS ARE
THE ONES WHO ARE MOST LIKELY TO
BE AFFECTED?
>> WELL, SO THAT'S TRUE OF MANY
THINGS, BUT IN ADDITION TO THOSE
FRAGILE, VULNERABLE PEOPLE, WE
ALSO HAVE THE PATIENTS THAT I
JUST DESCRIBED, SOMEBODY WHO IS
IN A TRAUMATIC CAR ACCIDENT,
SOMEBODY WHO IS RECEIVING CARE
FOR CANCER OR SOME OTHER
OPERATION.
PRETTY MUCH ANYBODY IN A HEALTH
CARE SETTING IS AT RISK.
WE'RE ALSO SEEING THAT BECAUSE
ANTIBIOTICS ARE USED IN THE
COMMUNITY AS WELL AS IN
HOSPITALS, SOME OF THESE
ORGANISMS CAN BE ALSO COMING
FROM THE COMMUNITY.
IT'S ONE OF THE REASONS THAT
HAVING THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT AS
AN ACTIVE PART OF THE
COLLABORATION IS SO VALUABLE,
BECAUSE THEY CAN LOOK
ACROSSETTINGS, NOT JUST IN ONE
HOSPITAL, BUT ALSO INTO THE
COMMUNITY.
>> Ifill: DR. MICHAEL BELL,
THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF THE
C.D.C. DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE
QUALITY PROMOTION.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US,
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
DR. BEN CARSON ON HIS BID FOR
THE PRESIDENCY.
WILDLIFE DETECTIVES BUST
POACHERS STEALING SHELLFISH OFF
THE COAST OF WASHINGTON STATE.
AND, A NEW FILM ON VIGILANTE
GROUPS FIGHTING DRUG CARTELS ON
THE BORDER OF THE U.S. AND
MEXICO.
>> Woodruff: WE RETURN NOW TO
EUROPE, AND ANOTHER LOOK AT THE
CONTINENT'S GROWING MIGRANT
CRISIS.
IN THE FORMER COMMUNIST NATION
OF HUNGARY, THE GOVERNMENT IS
RACING TO COMPLETE WHAT
OPPONENTS ARE CALLING A NEW IRON
CURTAIN ALONG ITS BORDER WITH
SERBIA, BY THE END OF THE MONTH.
LEADERS THERE SAY THEY CAN'T
COPE ANY MORE WITH THE TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF MIGRANTS WHO ARE
ENTERING THE COUNTRY AFTER
ARRIVING IN EUROPE THROUGH THE
GREEK ISLANDS.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM
BRABANT REPORTS.
[CRYING].
>> Reporter: THIS FAMILY IS
MORE THAN 3,000 MILES AWAY FROM
HOME IN CONGO.
AFTER MONTHS ON THE ROAD,
THEY'VE JUST SLIPPED ACROSS THE
FRONTIER FROM SERBIA AND HAVE
BEEN STOPPED BY THE HUNGARIAN
POLICE.
THE ADULTS DON'T WANT TO BE
FILMED FOR FEAR OF JEOPARDIZING
THEIR CHANCES OF REACHING FRANCE
ANOTHER THOUSAND MILES AWAY.
IN THIS POROUS BORDER REGION,
THE COUNTRY LANE IS TEEMING WITH
MIGRANTS.
YOU'RE IN HUNGARY.
YOU ARE IN HUNGARY.
WHERE DO U COYOME FROM?
>> COME FROM SERBIA.
OKAY.
ENOUGH.
>> Reporter: NEARBY A MEMBER
OF A RIGHT-WING VIGILANTE GROUP,
WHICH CLAIMS TO PROTECT A LOCAL
VIMAGE, STANDS GUARD OVER A
GROUP OF PAKISTANIS WHO HAVE
ALSO JUST ENTERED HUNGARY.
SOME FLED FOR ECONOMIC REASONS.
OTHERS BECAUSE OF PERSECUTION.
>> I WANTED TO MARRY SOME GIRL.
THEY KILLED HER.
SO THEY WANT TO KILL ME AND I'M
RUNNING.
ME AND MY FAMILY, MY RELATIVES,
EVERYBODY.
>> Reporter: THE MIGRANTS FEAR
A REPEAT OF VIOLENCE THEY SAY
WAS INFLICTED BY POLICE IN
BULGARIA.
>> THEY SHIPPED US HERE AND HERE
AND HERE.
EVERYTHING THEY TAKE FROM US.
>> Reporter: BUT THE VIGILANTE
LETS THEM GO.
THE AUTHORITIES ESTIMATE AS MANY
AS 2,000 PEOPLE ARE CROSSING
ILLEGALLY INTO HUNGARY EVERY
DAY, ALTHOUGH MOST HAVE NO
INTENTION OF REMAINING IN THE
COUNTRY, THEIR SHEER NUMBERS
INTIMIDATE SOME ON ISOLATED
FARMS.
THE OWNER OF THIS SMALL HOLDING
COMPLAINS OF AGGRESSIVE MIGRANTS
CLIMBING OVER HER FENCE LATE AT
NIGHT.
NIGHT. >> (TRANSLATED
): WE'VE GOT NO
>> (TRANSLATED): WE'VE
GOT NO IDEA WHAT THESE PEOPLE
ARE LIKE.
IDEA WHAT THESE PEOPLE ARE LIKE.
I'M AFRAID OF THEM BECAUSE I
LIVE ON MY OWN.
>> Reporter: HER NEIGHBOR
SHOWS OFF A GAS SPRAY.
HE KEEPS IT FOR PROTECTION.
IN THIS HOSTILE CLIMATE, THE
HUNGARIAN ARMY IS ON THE MOVE,
BUILDING A 110-MILE-LONG FENCE
ALONG THE BORDER WITH SERBIA.
OPPONENTS CALL IT EUROPE'S NEW
IRON CURTAIN.
DESPITE BEING ONE OF THE POORER
MEMBERS OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,
THE GOVERNMENT HERE IS
ALLOCATING MORE THAN $80 MILLION
TO THE PROJECT, MUCH TO THE
APPROVAL OF LOCAL ULTRA
NATIONALIST MAYOR.
>> THEY DESTROY ALL THEIR
DOCUMENTS BEFORE THEY ARRIVE TO
THE HUNGARIAN SIDE.
THEY DON'T WANT TO SHOW THEIR
IDENTITY.
WE NEVER KNOW WHO IS THAT MAY
GRAND.
MAYBE THERE IS A FEW TERRORISTS
IN THE GROUPS.
>> Reporter: SO FAR THIS YEAR
80,000 MIGRANTS HAVE CROSSED
INTO HUNGARY.
THIS GROUP IS WAITING FOR A BUS
CHARTERED BY THE HUNGARIAN
AUTHORITIES THAT WILL TAKE THEM
PART OF THE WAY TOWARD REFUGEE
CAMPS.
THIS LAW OFFICER WITH HUNGARY'S
HELSINKI COMMITTEE, WHICH
ADVOCATES ON BEHALF OF MIGRANTS
AND HELPS THEM WITH THEIR
APPLICATIONS FOR POLITICAL
ASYLUM.
>> BUILDING A FENCE WOULD NOT BE
AN EFFECTIVE TOOL TO STOP PEOPLE
FROM COMING, TO STOP REFUGEES
FROM THREING WAR ZONES.
IT'S MORE SEEN AS A POLITICAL
ACTION, AS A PROPAGANDA MEASURE
BY THE GOVERNMENT TO REINFORCE
THEIR POPULARITY OR TO STOP THE
DECREASE OF THEIR POPULARITY
AMONGST HUNDRED DWAIRN VOTERS.
>>>> Reporr:te 100 MILES FROM
THE BORDER IN THE CAPITAL
BUDAPEST, THE GOVERNMENT ARGUES
THAT OTHER WALLS AND FRIENDSS
HAVE BEEN EFFECTIVE AND DISMISS
ACCUSATIONS IT'S BEING ERECTED
TO WIN SUPPORT INSIDE HUNGARY.
A GOVERNMENT SPOKESMAN SAYS TIN
FLUX LEFT THEM WITH NO
ALTERNATIVE.
>> IT'S AN UNSTOPPABLE FLOOD.
IT'S GOING TO SPEED UP BY THE
END OF THE YEAR.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, THE
HUNGARIAN BORDER IS THE EUROPEAN
BORDER SOME WHEN WE ARE
PROTECTING THE BORDERS OF
HUNGARY, WE ARE AT THE SAME TIME
PROTECTING EUROPE.
>> SOCIALIST OPPOSITION PARTYS
HAVE ACCUSED THE GOVERNMENT FROM
ISOLATING HUNGARY FROM ITS
ALLIES AND LACKING IN HUMANITY,
BUT A LEADING LAWMAKER WITH THE
NATIONALIST PARTY BELIEVES THE
FENCE ALONE IS NOT ENOUGH AND
THAT ADDITIONAL PROTECTION
MEASURES ARE NEEDED.
>> THE MIGRATION THAT IS HITTING
THE BORDERS OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION IS ABSOLUTELY UNBEARABLE.
FROM THE SOUTHERN DIRECTION OR
FROM THE EASTERN DIRECTION,
WE'RE HAVING A FREE OF
MIGRATION, WHICH IS GOING TO
COME TO A SITUATION WHEREBY
EUROPE IS GOING TO COLLAPSE,
GIVEN THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS IN
EUROPE, GIVEN THE ECONOMIC AND
FINANCIAL SITUATION IN EUROPE,
AND, OF COURSE, GIVEN ALSO THIS
MIGRATION, EUROPE IS GOING TO
DISINTEGRATE IF WE DON'T GET
DOWN TO BUSINESS WITH REGARD TO
THE ISSUE OF MIGRATION.
>> Reporter: IT'S LONG BEEN
THE DREAM OF EUROPEAN
FEDERALISTS TO HAVE A UNION FREE
OF BORDER CONTROLS, TO
FACILITATE THE UNINHICKED
MOVEMENT.
OF PEOPLE AND GOODS.
BUT THE SCALE OF THE MIGRANT
CRISIS HAS CAUSED MANY
POLITICIANS TO QUESTION THE
WISDOM OF HAVING ERADICATED
PASSPORT CHECKS.
THIS FENCE MAY BE ON THE OUTER
REACHES OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,
BUT WILL IT ENCOURAGE OTHER
MEMBER STATES THE START
REINSTITUTING BORDER CONTROLS
INSIDE?
WHAT'S CLEAR IS THE CONCEPT OF A
UNITED STATES OF EUROPE IS BEING
UNDERMINED BY THIS HUMAN TIDE.
IN SERBIA ANOTHER TRANSIT
COUNTRY ON THE LONG REFUGEE
TRAIL NORTH, THE DECISION TO
BUILD A FENCE HAS BEEN MET WITH
ALARM.
SERBIA SAYS IT CAN'T AFFORD TO
PAY TO ACCOMMODATE AND CLEAN UP
AFTER THE MIGRANTS, AND THEY
HAVE ASKED THE FINANCIALLY
STRAPPED U.N. REFUGEE AGENCY TO
COVER ITS COSTS.
A LOCAL MAYOR CLAIMS HIS
MUNICIPALITY WILL RUN OUT OF
MONEY SOON AND FEARS THE FENCE
WILL EXACERBATE HIS PROBLEMS.
WILL EXACERBATE HIS PROBLEMS. >>
(TRANSLATED): IT'S THE
>> (TRANSLATED): IT'S
THE SOVEREIGN RIGHT OF ANY
COUNTRY
SOVEREIGN RIGHT OF ANY COUNTRY
TO BUILD A FINS ON ITS
TERRITORY, BUT THE WORST THING
IS THEY COULD BE STUCK HERE FOR
A LONGER PERIOD OF TIME, AND WE
DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO WITH THEM.
>> Reporter: SERBIA IS
REPORTED TO BE SPEEDING UP
EFFORTS TO HELP THE REFUGEES ON
THEIR WAY.
THEY ARRIVED IN THE SOUTHERN
HUNGARIAN TOWN WHERE THEY GET A
CHANCE THE CLEAN UP.
VERY BASIC FACILITIES PROVIDED
BY VOLUNTEERS SYMPATHETIC TO THE
MIGRANTS PLIGHT AND PAID FOR BY
DONATIONS DO HELP.
>> SOME MILK.
>> WE ALL REMEMBER WHAT THE TERM
IRON CURTAIN MEANT.
MY PARENTS GENERATION, THEY HAVE
VERY SAD MEMORIES ABOUT BUILDING
WALLS AND FENCES BETWEEN NATIONS
IN EUROPE.
THEY WERE ALL VERY HAPPY IN 1990
WHEN THE SO-CALLED IRON CURTAIN
WAS REMOVED, SO I THINK IT'S
VERY, LET'S SAY AN, ANYSIC TO
BUILD FENCES AND WALLS BETWEEN
COUNTRIES.
>> Reporter: AFTER A BRIEF
STAY, THEY'RE SENT BY TRAIN THE
BUDAPEST.
BUT INSTEAD OF BEING TAKEN TO A
REFUGEE CAMP, MANY OF THEM END
UP CAMPING OUT IN THE SUBWAYS
BENEATH THE MAIN RAILWAY
STATION.
ONE OF THE VOLUNTEERS IS ANGRY
THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT DOING
MORE TO HELP.
>> I THINK IT'S BOTH OUTRAGEOUS
AND EXTREMELY
IT'S VERY CLINICAL AT THE SAME
TIME.
WHAT THEY TRY TO DO NOW IS BOOST
THEIR POPULARITY BY POINTING TO
THESE PEOPLE AS A COMMON ENEMY.
THE REASON WHY THESE PEOPLE ARE
HERE IS SIMPLY BECAUSE THE
GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO TREAT THEM
AS HUMAN BEINGS.
>> THERE'S LESS SQUALOR BUT
UNDeMINTISHED DESPAIR IN A
BUDAPEST PARK WHERE A
20-YEAR-OLD FROM AFGHAN IS
RESTING AFTER WALKING THROUGH
IRAN AND PART OF TURKEY.
HE'S HELPING A YOUNG MOTHER AND
HER CHILD ON THEIR JOURNEY.
THEY'VE BECOME SOMETHING OF A
SURROGATE FAMILY AFTER, HE SAYS,
ISLAMISTS KILLED HIS PARENTS,
BROTHER AND SISTER AND BURNED
HIS HOME.
WHERE DO YOU WANT TO GO?
>> I DON'T KNOW.
I WANT TO GO TO A PLACE WHERE WE
HAVE PEACE AND THEY RESPECT ME.
>> Reporter: BUT WHERE?
>> LIKE GERMANY, LIKE ANOTHER
COUNTRY, ENGLAND.
THEY RESPECT ME.
THEY GIVE ME A HOME.
THEY GIVE ME NOT LIKE ANYWHERE.
WE ARE HUMAN.
WE HAVE BEEN LIVING IN THIS
WORLD.
>> Reporter: EVERY MIGRANT
CARRIES A PERSONAL TALE OF
HARDSHIP, BUT MANY EUROPEANS ARE
BECOMING SELECTIVELY DEAF AS THE
NUMBERS GROW AND THEIR
GOVERNMENTS ARE DIVIDED ABOUT
HOW TO RESPOND.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE MIGRANTS
ARE RACING TO BEAT THE FENCE
BEFORE IT IS COMPLETED.
FOR THE PBS "NEWSHOUR," I'M
MALCOLM BRABANT ON THE
HUNGARIAN-SERBIAN BORDER.
>> Ifill: MORE THAN A DOZEN
REPUBLICANS GATHERED IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE LAST NIGHT TO EXPLAIN
WHY ONE OF THEM SHOULD BE
PRESIDENT.
THE ROLLOUT CONTINUES THURSDAY
NIGHT AS THE TEN MOST POPULAR
GATHER IN CLEVELAND FOR THE
FIRST IN A SERIES OF
POLL-TESTED, PARTY-SANCTIONED
FORMAL DEBATES.
THIS AFTERNOON, FOX NEWS
ANNOUNCED THE STAGE WILL INCLUDE
DONALD TRUMP, WHO TOPS THE
POLLS, AND OHIO GOVERNOR JOHN
KASICH, WHO SQUEEZED TEXAS
GOVERNOR RICK PERRY OUT FOR THE
TENTH SLOT.
ALSO MAKING THE CUT: THE ONLY
PHYSICIAN IN THE RACE, RETIRED
NEUROSURGEON BEN CARSON.
I SPOKE WITH HIM A SHORT TIME
AGO AS PART OF OUR CONTINUING
SERIES ON THE MEN AND WOMEN
COMPETING IN 2016.
WE CALL IT "RUNNING."
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO TALK TO
YOU AS A PHYSICIAN.
IT'S THE ONE THING THAT MAKES
YOU VERY UNIQUE IN THIS RACE
FROM ALL THE OTHER MORE THAN A
DOZEN CANDIDATES.
AS YOU PREPARE TO GO ON THE
DEBATE STAGE IN CLEVELAND ON
THURSDAY, I'M SURE A LOT OF
THESE QUESTIONS WILL COME TO
YOU, AS WELL.
YOU'LL BEEN TALKING A LOT OF
PLANNED PARENTHOOD AND HOW IT
SHOULD BE DEFUNDED.
I WANT TO ASK YOU AS A
PHYSICIAN, WHO WOULD HAPPEN TO
THE PEOPLE WHO GO TO PLANNED
PARENTHOOD FOR TREATMENT OTHER
THAN ABORTION?
WHERE SHOULD THEY GET SERVICES?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I HAVE HAD AN
OPPORTUNITY TO BE THE GUEST
SPEAKER AT FUND-RAISERS FOR
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY CENTERS
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
THEY'RE ALL OVER THE PLACE.
AND THEY CAN GET THOSE SAME
SERVICES THERE.
PLUS THEY SOMEBODY WHO
COUNSELS THEM ON ALL THE
ALTERNATIVES THAT THEY HAVE AND
DOESN'T SORTS OF PUSH THEM IN
ONE DIRECTION.
>> Ifill: SO YOU'RE SAYING
THERE ARE OTHER ALTERNATIVES
WHICH DON'T INVOLVE GOVERNMENT
FUNDING?
>> YES, MOST OF THOSE ARE
PRIVATELY FUNDED.
>> Ifill: ANOTHER QUESTION FOR
YOU AS A PHYSICIAN: THERE HAS
BEEN MUCH DISCUSSION RECENTLY
AROUND THE COUNTRY ABOUT THE
BLACK LIVES MATTER MOVEMENT, AND
YOU HAVE MADE CLEAR THAT YOU
BELIEVE THAT ALL LIVES MATTER.
SO AS A PHYSICIAN WHO HAS DEALT
WITH VIOLENCE, WHO HAS WORKED IN
EMERGENCY ROOM, WHO HAS DEALT
WITH THE FALLOUT FROM THAT, WHY
WHAT SHOULD WE BE DOING ABOUT
GUN VIOLENCE IN THIS COUNTRY,
AND DOES IT DISPROPORTIONATELY
AFFECT ONE POPULATION OVER
ANOTHER?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY YOU SEE A LOT
MORE GUN VIOLENCE IN INNER
CITIES.
I'VE SPENT MANY, MANY A NIGHT,
YOU KNOW, WORKING ON THE HEADS
OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN SHOT IN
THE HEAD, YOU KNOW, BLACK PEOPLE
PRIMARILY, BUT WHITE PEOPLE, AS
WELL.
AND IT'S DEVASTATING.
AND, OF COURSE THOSE LIVES
MATTER.
I BELIEVE WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO DO IS REALLY CONCENTRATE
ON WHERE IS ALL THIS VIOLENCE
COMING FROM?
AND IT'S NOT ALL COMING FROM ONE
SPECIFIC AREA.
BUT IT'S COMING FROM A GENERAL
LACK OF RESPECT FOR LIFE.
AND, YOU KNOW, THIS PERSON
PISSED ME OFF, AND I GOT A GUN,
I'M GOING TO KILL THEM.
I MEAN, WHEN DID WE GET LIKE
THAT?
AND THE VALUES THAT USED TO BE
PUT INTO PEOPLE, I THINK A LOT
OF IT STEMS FROM THE FACT THAT
WE DON'T REALLY LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT VALUES ANYMORE BECAUSE
WHOSE VALUES ARE THEY, WE ASK?
YOU KNOW, IT'S ALL RELATIVE.
THERE IS NO RIGHT THERE, IS NO
WRONG.
YOU KNOW, IT'S ALL RELATIVE.
IT'S THE SAME THING THAT THE
ROMANS DID.
>> Ifill: THAT'S NOT THE SAME
THING AS A SOLUTION TO THE
PROBLEM.
>> NO.
THE SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM IS
WE HAVE TO START TEACHING VALUES
AGAIN, TEACHING PEOPLE TO
RESPECT ONE ANOTHER AGAIN, AND
TO UNDERSTAND THAT HUMAN LIFE IS
VALUABLE.
EVEN IF SOMEBODY DISAGREES WITH
YOU, THEIR LIFE IS STILL
VALUABLE.
>> ANOTHER QUESTION TO YOU AS A
PHYSICIAN, YOU HAVE CALLED FOR
THE REPEAL, LIKE MANY, PROBABLY
ALL REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES HAVE,
OF THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE
PLAN.
WHAT WOULD YOU REPLACE IT WITH?
>> I WOULD REPLACE IT WITH A
SYSTEM THAT PUTS THE CARE BACK
IN THE HANDS OF THE PATIENTS AND
THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
IT WOULD REVOLVE AROUND HEALTH
SAVINGS ACCOUNTS, WHICH
EVERYBODY WOULD HAVE MADE
AVAILABLE TO THEM FROM THE DAY
THEY'RE BORN UNTIL THE DAY THEY
DIE, ATHIC WH TIME THEY CAN PASS
IT ON TO THEIR FAMILY.
I WOULD PAY FOR IT WITH THE VERY
SAME DOLLARS WE PAY FOR
TRADITIONAL HEALTH CARE WORK
ALTHOUGH WE WOULDN'T HAVE TO USE
AS MUCH, AND PEOPLE WOULD HAVE
REAL CONTROL OF THEIR HEALTH
SAVINGS ACCOUNT.
IT WOULDN'T BE THE KIND THAT HAS
A WHOLE BUNCH OF BUREAUCRATS
INVOLVED.
YOU WOULD GIVE PEOPLE THE
ABILITY TO SHIFT MONEY WITHIN
THEIR HSA WITHIN THEIR FAMILY.
SO LET'S SAY YOU'RE 500 SHORT.
YOUR SISTER COULD GIVE IT TO
YOUR OR YOUR COUSIN OR UNCLE OR
GRANDMOTHER.
ANYBODY IN YOUR FAMILY MAKES
EVERY FAMILY THEIR OWN INSURANCE
COMPANY WITH NO MIDDLE MAN.
>> Ifill: SO MANY OTHER THINGS
I WANT TO TALK TO YOU ABOUT.
I DON'T WANT TO DUTT YOU OFF,
BUT I DO WANT THE MOVE ON THE
IMMIGRATION, WHICH THE PRESIDENT
HAS OBVIOUSLY TALKED THAT HE HAS
AN APPROACH.
DONALD TRUMP HAS SAID HE HAS AN
APPROACH, BUILDING A WALL, WHICH
I THINK YOU SAID IS STUPID.
YOU HAVE SUGGESTED PERHAPS
CREATING A GUEST WORKER PROGRAM
THAT ALLOWS PEOPLE BACK INTO THE
COUNTRY.
HOW DO YOU AT THE ROOT TAKE CARE
OF THOSE OR SOMEHOW DEPORT THOSE
11 MILLION UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS WHO ARE HERE NOW?
>> WELL, I HAVEN'T SAID ANYTHING
ABOUT DEPORTING THEM.
WHAT I SAID IS WE HAVE TO SECURE
ALL THE BORDERS, NOT JUST THE
SOUTHERN BORDER, BECAUSE IT'S
NOT JUST PELE OPFROM MEXICO AND
HONDURAS.
IT'S JIHADISTS.
WE NEED TO BE ABLE TO SECURE
THOSE BORDERS.
AND THEN WE NEED TO TURN OFF THE
SPIGOT THAT DISPENSES ALL THE
THINGS THEY'RE COMING HERE TO
GET.
IF THERE'S NO REASON FOR THEM TO
COME HERE, THAT STOPS THE
INFLUX.
NOW, YOU STILL HAVE 11.5 MILLION
PEOPLE HERE, SOME OF WHOM HAVE
NEVER BEEN ANY PLACE ELSE.
WHERE ARE YOU GOING TO SEND THEM
TO?
WE HAVE TO BE PRAGMATIC HERE.
THOSE PEOPLE ARE GIVEN AN
OPPORTUNITY TO BECOME GUST GUEST
WORKERS.
THEY HAVE TO REGISTER AND THEY
HAVE TO BACK TAX AND THEY
HAVE TO PAY TAXES GOING FORWARD
ANDS A WE DON'T COLLAPSE THE
FARMING INDUSTRY AND HOTEL
INDUSTRY AND A BUNCH OF OTHER
INDUSTRIES.
IT DOESN'T GIVE THEM CITIZENSHIP
AND VOTING RIGHTS.
IF THEY WANT TO GET IN
CITIZENSHIP, THEY GET IN THE
BACK OF THE LINE AND GO THROUGH
THE SAME PROCESS AS EVERYBODY
ELSE.
>> I WANT TO READ BACK TO YOU
SOMETHING YOU SAID LAST NIGHT AT
THE FORUM IN NEW HAMPSHIRE AND
YOU HAVE SAID BEFORE.
YOU TALKED ABOUT HOW RELIGIOUS
FREEDOM IS UNDER ATTACK AND YOU
WENT ON TO SAY, THERE'S A WAR ON
WOMEN, RACIAL WARS, INCOME WAR,
RELIGIOUS WARS, EVERY WAR THAT
YOU CAN IMAGINE IS GOING ON, YOU
SAID.
WHY DO YOU THINK THAT IS?
AND WHAT IS IT THAT A PRESIDENT
CAN DO TO SPEAK TO THAT
CONFLICT?
>> WHY ARE THE PURVEYORS OF
HATRED AND DIVISION HAVING A
FIELD DAY IN OUR SOCIETY?
I THINK SOME OF IT COMES FROM
THE FACT THAT WE ARE NOT
RESISTING THEM.
AND OUR POSITIONS OF LEADERSHIP,
IN SOME CASES WE ACTUALLY PLAY
INTO THE HANDS OF THE PURVEYORS
OF DIVISION RATHER THAN POINTING
OUT WHAT WE ALL HAVE IN COMMON.
AND THAT'S SOMETHING THAT I
THINK THE BULLY PULPIT IS
PARTICULARLY USEFUL FOR DOING.
>> SO THE BULLY PULPIT IS A
SOLUTION THE ALL OF THESE WARS?
>> IT'S NOT A SOLUTION, BUT IT
HELPS TREMENDOUSLY.
AND, YOU KNOW, WE HAVE TO MAKE
IT VERY CLEAR TO THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE THAT WE'RE NOT EACH
OTHER'S ENEMIES.
AND JUST BECAUSE SOMEBODY
HAPPENS TO DISAGREE WITH YOU
ABOUT SOMETHING DOESN'T MEAN
THAT THEY BECOME YOUR MORTAL
ENEMY AND THAT YOU SHOULD TRY TO
DESTROY THEM AND DESTROY THEIR
LIFE AND DESTROY THEIR FAMILY.
WHERE DID THIS KIND OF STUFF
COME FROM.
OBVIOUSLY IT DOES NOT COME FROM
ANYBODY WHOSE INTERESTED IN
STRENGTHENING OUR COUNTRY.
>> DR. BEN CARSON, GOOD LUCK ON
THURSDAY NIGHT, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, WHEN YOU HEAR
THE WORD POACHING, YOU MIGHT
THINK OF TROPHY HUNTERS KILLING
BIG GAME IN AFRICA.
BUT MILLIONS OF DOLLARS ARE MADE
IN AN ILLEGAL TRADE MUCH CLOSER
TO HOME.
KATIE CAMPBELL OF KCTS IN
SEATTLE HAS THE STORY.
SHE REPORTS FOR THE PUBLIC MEDIA
PROJECT EARTHFIX.
>> I NEED A UNIFORM.
I NEED A UNIFORM.
RIGHT THERE, RIGHT THERE.
>> Reporter: THIS IS A BUST, BUT
IT'S NOT WHAT YOU THINK.
THESE OFFICERS ARE BREAKING UP A
BLACK MARKET OF ILLEGALLY
HARVESTED SHELLFISH-- CLAMS,
OYSTERS, MUSSELS.
POACHERS ARE STEALING THEM FROM
WASHINGTON'S PUGET SOUND...
>> THE CLAMS ARE STOLEN.
>> Reporter: ...AND SELLING THEM
FOR THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS, SAYS
WASHINGTON FISH AND WILDLIFE
DEPUTY CHIEF MIKE CENCI.
>> FISH AND WILDLIFE POLICE
OFFICERS ARE THE ONLY THING
STANDING BETWEEN BAD GUYS THAT
POACH BIVALVE SHELLFISH FROM
AREAS THAT THEY SHOULDN'T, AND
HUMAN HEALTH AND SAFETY.
>> Reporter: OFFICERS ARE ON
PATROL DAY AND NIGHT, SEARCHING
FOR POACHERS, STAKING OUT
BUSINESSES AND COLLECTING
EVIDENCE.
THEY SAY CHEATING THE SYSTEM IS
MUCH EASIER THAN POLICING IT.
SHELLFISH ARE A HIGH RISK FOOD
BECAUSE THEY'RE FILTER FEEDERS.
THEY SUCK IN WHATEVER IS IN THE
WATER-- TOXINS, HARMFUL
PATHOGENS OR EVEN POLLUTANTS.
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE GET SKIC
FROM TAINTED SHELLFISH EACH YEAR
IN THE UNITED STATES.
SOME EVEN DIE.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN POACHED
SEAFOOD AND LEGAL SEAFOOD ISN'T
SOMETHING YOU CAN SEE.
FOR CLUES, WASHINGTON FISH AND
WILDLIFE SERGEANT ERIK OLSON HAS
TO CHECK THE PAPERWORK.
>> SO, DO YOU HAVE ANY PAPERWORK
FOR THIS?
>> I SHOULD HAVE.
>> Reporter: THE PAPERWORK IS
MEANT TO ENSURE THAT SHELLFISH
CAN BE TRACED BACK TO THE BEACH
FROM WHERE IT WAS HARVESTED.
IT'S A LOW-TECH PROCESS BASED ON
THE HONOR SYSTEM.
>> SO, IF YOU WANT TO FIND OUT
WHERE THESE OYSTERS ARE FROM,
HOW DO YOU KNOW?
>> Reporter: BILL DEWEY WORKS
FOR TAYLOR SHELLFISH AND IS
CHAIR OF THE COMMITTEE THAT
DEVELOPS THE NATIONWIDE RULES
FOR TRACKING SHELLFISH.
>> SO, WHEN WE DO A HARVEST ON
THE BEACH, THE HARVESTERS
GENERATE A HANDWRITTEN TAG WITH
ALL OF THE INFORMATION ABOUT THE
DATE, THE BED THAT IT'S
HARSTEDVE, ALL OF OUR COMPANY
INFORMATION, OUR CERTIFICATION
NUMBER AND SO ON.
>> Reporter: TAGS ACCOMPANY THE
SHELLFISH FROM THE BEACH TO THE
PROCESSING PLANT, ALL THE WAY TO
THE MARKETPLACE, SUPPOSEDLY
GUARANTEEING THAT THESE
SHELLFISH ARE SAFE TO EAT.
>> IF YOU'RE IN A RESTAURANT AND
YOU ORDER OYSTERS, YOU SHOULD BE
ABLE TO ASK YOUR WAIT STAFF TO
SEE THE TAG THAT CAME WITH THAT
SHELLFISH WHEN IT WAS DELIVERED
TO THE RESTAURANT.
>> Reporter: BUT A SYSTEM BASED
ON TRUST IS ALSO VULNERABLE TO
ABUSE.
>> IF PEOPLE WANT TO SELL
ILLEGAL SHELLFISH, YOU CAN DO
IT.
YOU CAN GAME THE SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: CHEATING THE SYSTEM
IS AS EASY AS MAKING A FAKE TAG.
>> THERE'S GOT TO BE SOMEBODY
OUT THERE WRITING TICKETS ONCE
IN A WHILE TO KEEP EVERYBODY IN
CHECK AND MAKE SURE YOU'RE DOING
IT RIGHT.
>> YOU DON'T HAVE ONE OUNCE OF
LABELING ANYWHERE THROUGHOUT
THIS PLACE.
IF YOU CANNOT PROVE WHERE IT
CAME FROM AND THAT IT'S SAFE FOR
HUMAN CONSUMPTION, I CAN'T LET
YOU SELL IT.
>> Reporter: WITH THOUSANDS OF
MARKETS AND RESTAURANTS IN THE
SEATTLE AREA ALONE, OLSON SAYS
IF HE HAD MORE TIME OR MORE
OFFICERS, HE COULD FILE A
FELONY-LEVEL SHELLFISH VIOLATION
PRETTY MUCH EVERY DAY.
BUT WHAT'S EVEN MORE ALARMING IS
THAT FISH AND WILDLIFE
INVESTIGATIONS ARE FINDING THE
SHELLFISH BLACK MARKET IS
OPERATING THROUGH BUSINESSES
THAT HAVE LITTLE TO DO WITH
SEAFOOD-- PLACES LIKE NAIL
SALONS, GAS STATIONS AND EVEN A
VIDEO STORE.
>> FRANKLY, IF SOMEONE WOULD'VE
TOLD ME THAT AN ASIAN VIDEO
STORE WOULD BE A PLACE THAT
SHELLFISH WOULD BE TRAFFICKED, I
WOULDN'T HAVE BELIEVED THEM.
AND WE KNOW NOW THAT ANY
BUSINESS, ANY STOREFRONT COULD
BE POTENTIALLY INVOLVED IN THE
SEAFOOD TRADE.
>> Reporter: OF ALL THE
SHELLFISH THAT SELL ON THE BLACK
MARKET, ONE CLAM IS ABOVE THE
REST: THE GEODUCK.
MOST AMERICANS HAVE NEVER HEARD
OF, MUCH LESS EATEN, A GEODUCK.
SO, WHY IS THERE SUCH A THRIVING
BLACK MARKET FOR THEIR MEAT?
BEFORE WE ANSWER THAT, LET'S GET
ONE THING OUT OF THE WAY.
IT MAY BE SPELLED GEODUCK, BUT
IT'S PRONOUNCED "GOOEY-DUCK."
GEODUCKS ARE THE LARGEST
BURROWING CLAMS IN THE WORLD.
PREDOMINANTLY FOUND IN PUGET
SOUND, THEY CAN LIVE UP TO 160
YEARS; THAT'S ONE OF THE LONGEST
LIFESPANS IN THE ENTIRE ANIMAL
KINGDOM.
AN ADULT GEODUCK WEIGHS AROUND
ONE-TO-THREE POUNDS, AND IN ASIA
THEIR MEAT IS A PRIZED DELICACY.
ABOUT 90% OF THE GEODUCKS
HARVESTED IN THE U.S. ARE SENT
ACROSS THE PACIFIC.
THAT'S ABOUT $70 MILLION WORTH A
YEAR.
IN CHINA, GEODUCK WAS ONCE
RESERVED FOR ELITE BANQUETS, BUT
CHINA'S GROWING MIDDLE CLASS HAS
DEVELOPED A TASTE FOR THE
DELICACY AND THE DISPOSABLE
INCOME TO AFFORD IT.
THIS RISING DEMAND HAS SENT
GEODUCK RETAIL PRICES TO AS HIGH
AS $150 PER POUND, AND SOARING
PRICES CREATE A BIG INCENTIVE
FOR POACHERS.
HERE'S HOW IT WORKS: HARVESTING
WILD GEODUCK IS ALLOWED ONLY IN
CERTAIN AREAS OF PUGET SOUND;
THE STATE AUCTIONS OFF EACH
AREA, BUT THERE'S A STILL LIMIT
ON HOW MUCH CAN BE DUG UP WITHIN
EACH AREA.
THE MAN WHO DECIDES THAT LIMIT
IS BOB SIZEMORE.
HE'S WASHINGTON STATE'S LEAD
GEODUCK RESEARCH SCIENTIST.
>> YOU NEED TO BE VERY CAREFUL
WITH THE HARVEST RATE.
BASICALLY, IF YOU CUT DOWN A
FOREST, IT TAKES A VERY LONG
TIME TO COME BACK.
>> Reporter: EACH TIME AN AREA
IS HARVESTED, IT TAKES ABOUT 40
YEARS FOR THE GEODUCK POPULATION
TO RECOVER.
THAT'S WHY HARVEST RATE IS 2.7%;
ANYTHING HIGHER WOULD NOT BE
SUSTAINABLE.
OUT IN PUGET SOUND, SIZEMORE AND
HIS TEAM COUNT GEODUCKS BEFORE
AND AFTER AN AREA IS HARVESTED.
BUT WITH JUST FIVE DIVERS,
THEY'RE ONLY ABLE TO SURVEY 3%
OF AREAS GEODUCKS ARE FOUND.
>> WE STILL SEE SIGNS OF ILLEGAL
HARVEST, WE STILL SEE SIGNS OF
POACHING, AND WE DON'T FIND ANY
RECOVERY.
>> Reporter: OANY N GIVEN NIGHT,
TONS OF FRESH SEAFOOD PASS
THROUGH SEATTLE-TACOMA
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT.
IT'S A BOTTLENECK WHERE FISH AND
WILDLIFE OFFICERS CAN CHECK THE
CARGO AS IT'S MOVING THROUGH.
>> THE OVERWELMHING MAJORITY OF
THAT PRODUCT IS, IN FACT,
GEODUCK.
IT'S JUST THOUSANDS OF POUNDS.
IF SHELLFISH IS NOT ACCOMPANIED
BY A DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
CERTIFICATION TAG, I AM REQUIRED
TO SEIZE THAT.
>> Reporter: OFFICERS MUST LOOK
AT EACH TAG TO FIND OUT WHETHER
THE SHELLFISH CAME FROM AN OPEN
AREA AND WERE HARVESTED BY A
LICENSED HARVESTER.
>> THAT IS NOT SALMON.
>> Reporter: THERE'S NO
ELECTRONIC SYSTEM OR ANY QUICK
WAY TO DETERMINE IF THE
INFORMATION ON THE TAGS IS
ACCURATE.
EVERYTHING MUST BE HAND CHECKED.
OFFICERS CONFISCATE SEAFOOD
THAT'S NOT PROPERLY TAGGED, BUT
THEY'RE ONLY ABLE TO CHECK A
FRACTION OF THE BOXES AND
THERE'S NO TELLING HOW MUCH
POACHED SHELLFISH SLIPS THROUGH.
>> IF THE INCENTIVE IS THERE--
AND BELIEVE ME IT'S THERE, WE'RE
TALKING BIG MONEY-- THEN PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
THE HOLES IN THE SYSTEM.
AND RIGHT NOW, THE ARERE HOLES
THAT YOU CAN DRIVE A SEMI-TRUCK
THROUGH.
>> Reporter: FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, I'M KATIE CAMPBELL
WITH EARTHFIX IN SEATTLE.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT:
VIOLENCE AND SUFFERING IN
MEXICO'S DRUG WARS, CAPTURED IN
CLOSE-UP DETAIL.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR LOOK.
>> Brown: IT'S THE STUFF OF
THE NIGHTLY NEWS, THE VIOLENT
IN MEXICO AND ALONG
THE U.S. BORDER.
BUT THE DOCUMENTARY "CARTEL
LAND," WHICH WON AWARDS AT THE
SUNDANCE FILM FESTIVAL FOR
DIRECTING AND CINEMATOGRAPHY,
TAKES THE VIEWER ALONG ON A
SOMETIMES WILD AND SCARY RIDE AT
GROUND LEVEL.
FILMMAKER MATTHEW HEINEMAN
EMBEDDED HIMSELF WITH MET COOK,
SELF-APPOINTED LAWMEN AND
OTHERS.
WE SPOKE WE SETHLY AT THE A.F.I.
DOCKS FESTIVAL IN WASHINGTON.
>> FOR ME THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF
REALLY WONDERFUL DOCUMENTARIES,
NEWS STORIES, ARTICLES ABOUT THE
DRUG WAR, ABOUT POLICY, ABOUT
THIS ISSUE, AND I REALLY WANTED
TO PUT MYSELF ON THE GROUND IN
THE MIDDLE OF IT.
I WANTED TO GET INTO PLACES THAT
PEOPLE HADN'T SEEN BEFORE.
I'M IN THE A WAR REPORTER.
I HAVE NEVER BEEN IN SITUATIONS
LIKE THIS BEFORE.
>> YOU NEVER HAVE?
>> NEVER.
>> THAT'S EXACTLY THE KIND OF
SITUATION HEINEMAN FOUND HIMSELF
IN.
HE TELLS A STORY THROUGH THE
LENS OF TWO MODERN-DAY VIGILANTE
GROUPS, MENTION -- MEXICANS LED
BY THE CHARISMATIC DR. JOSE
MERRARAS.
AND A PARAMILITARY GROUP OF
AMERICANS PATROLLING THE U.S.
BORDER, LED BY TIM FOLEY OF
ARIZONA.
>> ON SOME LEVEL THE CHARACTERS
ARE THESE TWO MEN.
THEY'RE BOTH 55 YEARS OLD.
ONE LIVES IN ARIZONA, ONE IN
MEXICO.
THEY BOTH BELIEVE THE GOVERNMENT
HAS FAILED THEM.
AND THEY BOTH HAVE SORT OF TAKEN
UP ARMS TO FIGHT FOR WHAT THEY
BELIEVE IN.
ACCESS AND TRUST ARE EVERYTHING,
AND DEVELOPING THAT TRUST WITH
MY SUBJECTS WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
OBVIOUSLY ESPECIALLY ON THE
MEXICO SIDE, YOU KNOW, IT'S
REALLY FRIGHTENING.
I MEAN, I... YOU REALLY DIDN'T
KNOW IF YOU WERE WITH THE GOOD
GUYS OR THE BAD GUYS.
AND VERY QUICKLY I REALIZED THIS
STORY WAS MORE COMPLICATED, THAT
THE LINES BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL
WERE MUCH MORE BLURRY.
>> Brown: COMPLICATED INDEED.
WE WATCH AS KEY FIGURES ARE
COMPROMISED, LEADERS AND
CITIZENS IN MEXICO BEGIN TO ACT
MORE AND MORE LIKE THE CARTELS
THEY'RE FIGHTING.
>> THAT'S ALSO WHEN IT STARTS TO
GET SCARY FOR YOU.
>> YEAH.
FOR THE CITIZENS LIVING, THERE
IT'S HORRIBLE.
THEY'VE BEEN LIVING IN THESE
CONDITIONS FOR YEARS, THERE'S NO
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS.
OFTEN THE GOVERNMENT IS
COLLUDING WITH THE CARTEL.
THERE'S NO ONE TO TURN.
TO THAT'S WHAT'S SO CARRIE.
THAT'S WHAT THIS MOVEMENT WAS
BORN OUT OF, IT WAS BORN OUT OF
THIS DESIRE TO BRING ORDER AND
COYORS AND SAFETY.
>> THERE IS AN INCREDIBLE SCENE
IN THE BACK OF A CAR, IN A VAN,
WHERE A VIGILANTE GROUP IN
MEXICO HAS GRABBED SOMEBODY OFF
THE STREET AND IS HOLDNING THEM
AT GUNPOINT, ACCUSING HIM OF
BEING ONE OF THE CARTEL MEMBERS.
TELL ME ABOUT THAT, BECAUSE
YOU... IT'S REMARKABLY SHOT.
IT'S A HORRIFYING MOMENT BECAUSE
YOU DON'T KNOW IF... WE DON'T
KNOW IF THE GUY IS ACTUALLY
GUILTY OF ANYTHING.
>> I WAS IN THE BACK OF THIS CAR
AS THEY WERE INTERROGATING HIM,
RUNNING A GUN UP AND DOWN HIS
HEAD.
IT WAS FRIGHTENING.
AS A HUMAN BEING WHO CARES ABOUT
PEOPLE AND CARES ABOUT THE
WORLD, SEEING THIS VIOLENCE, YOU
KNOW, LITERALLY RIGHT IN FRONT
OF ME, OBVIOUSLY MY HUMAN
INSTINCTS WERE TRYING TO STOP
IT, BUT I'M THERE TO DOCUMENT
WHAT WAS HAPPENING.
>> NEAR THE END OF FILM, ONE OF
THE CHARACTERS SAYS IT'S NEVER
GOING TO STOP, PERIOD.
IS THAT WHAT YOU CAME TO THINK?
>> I REALLY DO THINK THIS
PROBLEM IS CYCLICAL.
AND I DO, YOU KNOW, AS LONG AS
THERE'S A DEMAND FOR DRUGS IN
THE STATES, THERE WILL BE SUPPLY
FOR DRUGS IN MEXICO AND SOUTH
AMERICA FLOWING NORTHWARD.
I DO FIND SOME HOPE THAT PEOPLE
ARE SICK OF THIS IN MEXICO.
I FIND HOPE IN PEOPLE STANDING
UP AND SAYING, WE CAN'T TAKE
THIS ANYMORE.
WHETHER THAT RESULTS IN CHANGE,
YOU KNOW, WHO KNOWS, BUT I THINK
IT'S IMPORTANT THAT PEOPLE OUT
THERE TALK ABOUT IT.
BECAUSE FOR YEARS PEOPLE OFTEN
WALKED AROUND SHROUDED IN FEAR,
AND EVEN MENTIONING THE CARTEL,
PEOPLE NEVER EVEN DREAMED OF
SAYIN THGAT, SO I THINK, YOU
KNOW, I FIND SOME HOPE IN THAT.
>> THE FILM "CARTEL LAND" CAN BE
SEEN IN SELECT THEATERS AROUND
THE COUNTRY THIS SUMMER.
FROM WASHINGTON, D.C.,, I'M
JEFFREY BROWN FOR THE PBS NEWS
HOUR.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, A GROUP OF ARTISTS AND
COMMUNITY MEMBERS BANDED
TOGETHER TO GIVE FERGUSON A
MAKEOVER AFTER RIOTS DESTROYED
SOME OF THE TOWN'S BUSINESSES,
AND THE RESULTS CAN BE SEEN IN A
NEW CHILDREN'S BOOK, "PAINTING
FOR PEACE IN FERGUSON."
WE HAVE A PHOTO GALLERY OF SOME
OF THOSE MURALS, ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, "COLD MOUNTAIN,"
THE CIVIL WAR LOVE STORY.
ONCE A BEST SELLING NOVEL,
NOW A NEW OPERA.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.